##### Fighting FreshDirect: South Bronx's struggle for environmental and economic justice

In 2018 headlines, the Mott Haven neighborhood in the South Bronx was described as the last "battle line" between the internet food-delivery giants FreshDirect and AmazonFresh. Despite significant community opposition, the largely minority and low-income neighborhood became the un-consenting prize awarded to FreshDirect in the form of a 400,000 square-foot facility on St Ann's Avenue.

Situated between the Major Deegan and the Bruckner Expressway, Mott Haven now suffers significantly higher-trafficked thoroughfares in an area that already had the highest asthma-related emergency hospital visits in the city. As a neighborhood now defined as a center of industry, Mott Haven continuously finds itself caught in the wake of cars and trucks riding the multiple highways, releasing particulates into the air resulting in significantly increased air pollution. In fact, Columbia's Mailman School of Public Health reported an undeniable increase in black carbon air pollution in Mott Haven in 2020 following the opening of the FreshDirect warehouse.[^1]

The city's neglect of the South Bronx is not a recent development - in the 1970's the Bronx suffered a drawn-out period of disinvestment and urban decay. That decade saw a housing crises and HUD and city policies that failed the Bronx's largely minority communities. The legacy of redlining also left its imprints as banks and insurance companies stayed away from the borough due to the race-based discriminatory practices of the Home Owners Loan Corporation in the 1930s. This redlining, along with the construction of the Cross Bronx Expressway, brought on irrevocably decreased property values.[^2]

The city's move to subsidize the construction and opening of a delivery warehouse only exacerbated the public health concerns related to air quality in the Bronx. Today, the South Bronx's waterfront has developed into a significant industrial area. Despite having a large portion of its perimeter touch water, little of the South Bronx's waterfront is for community use or residential use. The waterfront areas of Hunts Point and Mott Haven are mainly designated as M3 districts (manufacturing districts with heavy industries) which include the new FreshDirect warehouse and the Hunts Point Cooperative Market. The high concentration of industrial activity in these would-be economic oases result in a higher aggregate release of noxious particulates into the air. Deliberate city planning designed a high concentration of industrial activity and increased traffic density in the Bronx, knowingly contributing to the environmental degradation in the borough with the highest percent minority population and percent of residents near or below NYCgov poverty threshold. Alongside disproportionate deterioration of the environmental safety of these minority and low-income communities, the Bronx is the epicenter of new asthma cases in the city.

In the song "Black Snakes," a response to the Standing Rock Protests against the the Dakota Access Pipeline, Prolific the Rapper recounts "I used to be in the oil fields, getting paid" and raps "But I quit, 'cause oil-water I can't drink." [^3] FreshDirect, with city politics at its aid, is enacting something akin to "corporate colonialism" in the South Bronx. Like Prolific's line, FreshDirect's industry yields nothing to better the South Bronx's communities and environments. FreshDirect's primary consumer base resides in Manhattan, where the percent of the population near or in poverty is much lower. As stated, FreshDirect is not the origin of the South Bronx's environmental health concerns. I begin this story with FreshDirect because it is the facility named by South Bronx Unite's campaign for environmental justice which extends its organization to issues of oppressive city planning, racism, economic justice, indigenous land rights, and democracy.

South Bronx Unite, a coalition of South Bronx residents, organizations, and allies, campaigned against FreshDirect when the city subsidized its construction plan without community input. Using the FreshDirect case, South Bronx Unite is able to articulate racial, economic, and public health politics. In a statement, the coalition explicates a struggle against asthma rates, lack of economic opportunity, democratic politics, and failed urban planning. Furthermore, South Bronx Unite pushes for Native American land acknowledge, factually stating that the city is aware that "artifacts of the Ranachqua Village and burial ground may be present" and that FreshDirect would build an underground parking lot to accompany its warehouse. South Bronx Unite also call out that "Governor Guomo, Mayor Bloomberg, and Borough President Diaz announced that the deal was done two days before the sole public hearing on the matter."[^4] Ignoring and not even offering the chance for community input, the city also has not met promises to change the South Bronx's industrial and traffic congested landscape. Using the language of environmental and economic justice, South Bronx Unite not only takes aim at FreshDirect, but extends its campaign to the city by analyzing its deliberate modeling of the South Bronx environment into one that is directly harmful to the health of its residents.

[^1]: Shearston, Jenni A. et al. "Opening a Large Delivery Service Warehouse in the South Bronx: Impacts on Traffic, Air Pollution, and Noise." *International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health* 17.9 (2020): 3208. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17093208.
[^2]: Hu, Winnie. "Fighting the Image of the 'Burning' Borough." New York Times, 2 June 2013. New York Times (Online), https://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/03/nyregion/the-bronx-struggles-to-shed-burning-borough-image.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.
[^3]: Prolific the Rapper and A Tribe Called Red. Black Snakes. Youtube. 2016. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nh_HCqp3sd0.  
[^4]: South Bronx Unite. "Why We Fight FreshDirect" South Bronx Unite, http://southbronxunite.org/environmental-justice/freshdirect/sample-page/.
